---
title: Room Version 1
type: docs
weight: 10
---

This room version is the first ever version for rooms, and contains the
building blocks for other room versions.

## Client considerations

Clients may need to consider some algorithms performed by the server for
their own implementation.

### Redactions

Upon receipt of a redaction event, the server must strip off any keys
not in the following list:

-   `event_id`
-   `type`
-   `room_id`
-   `sender`
-   `state_key`
-   `content`
-   `hashes`
-   `signatures`
-   `depth`
-   `prev_events`
-   `prev_state`
-   `auth_events`
-   `origin`
-   `origin_server_ts`
-   `membership`

The content object must also be stripped of all keys, unless it is one
of one of the following event types:

-   `m.room.member` allows key `membership`.
-   `m.room.create` allows key `creator`.
-   `m.room.join_rules` allows key `join_rule`.
-   `m.room.power_levels` allows keys `ban`, `events`, `events_default`,
    `kick`, `redact`, `state_default`, `users`, `users_default`.
-   `m.room.aliases` allows key `aliases`.
-   `m.room.history_visibility` allows key `history_visibility`.

## Server implementation components

Warning

The information contained in this section is strictly for server
implementors. Applications which use the Client-Server API are generally
unaffected by the intricacies contained here. The section above
regarding client considerations is the resource that Client-Server API
use cases should reference.

The algorithms defined here should only apply to version 1 rooms. Other
algorithms may be used by other room versions, and as such servers
should be aware of which version room they are dealing with prior to
executing a given algorithm.

Warning

Although there are many rooms using room version 1, it is known to have
undesirable effects. Servers implementing support for room version 1
should be aware that restrictions should be generally relaxed and that
inconsistencies may occur.

### State resolution

Warning

Room version 1 is known to have bugs that can cause the state of rooms
to reset to older versions of the room's state. For example this could
mean that users who had joined the room may be removed from the room,
admins and moderators could lose their power level, and users who have
been banned from the room may be able to rejoin. Other state events such
as the the room's name or topic could also reset to a previous version.

This is fixed in the state resolution algorithm introduced in room
version 2.

The room state *S*′(*E*) after an event *E* is defined in terms of the
room state *S*(*E*) before *E*, and depends on whether *E* is a state
event or a message event:

-   If *E* is a message event, then *S*′(*E*) = *S*(*E*).
-   If *E* is a state event, then *S*′(*E*) is *S*(*E*), except that its
    entry corresponding to *E*'s `event_type` and `state_key` is
    replaced by *E*'s `event_id`.

The room state *S*(*E*) before *E* is the *resolution* of the set of
states {*S*′(*E*′), *S*′(*E*″), …} consisting of the states after each
of *E*'s `prev_event`s {*E*′, *E*″, …}.

The *resolution* of a set of states is defined as follows. The resolved
state is built up in a number of passes; here we use *R* to refer to the
results of the resolution so far.

-   Start by setting *R* to the union of the states to be resolved,
    excluding any *conflicting* events.
-   First we resolve conflicts between `m.room.power_levels` events. If
    there is no conflict, this step is skipped, otherwise:
    -   Assemble all the `m.room.power_levels` events from the states to
        be resolved into a list.
    -   Sort the list by ascending `depth` then descending
        `sha1(event_id)`.
    -   Add the first event in the list to *R*.
    -   For each subsequent event in the list, check that the event
        would be allowed by the authorization rules for a room in state
        *R*. If the event would be allowed, then update *R* with the
        event and continue with the next event in the list. If it would
        not be allowed, stop and continue below with `m.room.join_rules`
        events.
-   Repeat the above process for conflicts between `m.room.join_rules`
    events.
-   Repeat the above process for conflicts between `m.room.member`
    events.
-   No other events affect the authorization rules, so for all other
    conflicts, just pick the event with the highest depth and lowest
    `sha1(event_id)` that passes authentication in *R* and add it to
    *R*.

A *conflict* occurs between states where those states have different
`event_ids` for the same `(event_type, state_key)`. The events thus
affected are said to be *conflicting* events.

### Authorization rules

The types of state events that affect authorization are:

-   `m.room.create`
-   `m.room.member`
-   `m.room.join_rules`
-   `m.room.power_levels`
-   `m.room.third_party_invite`

Note

Power levels are inferred from defaults when not explicitly supplied.
For example, mentions of the `sender`'s power level can also refer to
the default power level for users in the room.

The rules are as follows:

1.  If type is `m.room.create`:
    1.  If it has any previous events, reject.
    2.  If the domain of the `room_id` does not match the domain of the
        `sender`, reject.
    3.  If `content.room_version` is present and is not a recognised
        version, reject.
    4.  If `content` has no `creator` field, reject.
    5.  Otherwise, allow.
2.  Reject if event has `auth_events` that:
    1.  have duplicate entries for a given `type` and `state_key` pair
    2.  have entries whose `type` and `state_key` don't match those
        specified by the [auth events
        selection](../server_server/%SERVER_RELEASE_LABEL%.html#auth-events-selection)
        algorithm described in the server specification.
3.  If event does not have a `m.room.create` in its `auth_events`,
    reject.
4.  If type is `m.room.aliases`:
    1.  If event has no `state_key`, reject.
    2.  If sender's domain doesn't matches `state_key`, reject.
    3.  Otherwise, allow.
5.  If type is `m.room.member`:
    1.  If no `state_key` key or `membership` key in `content`, reject.
    2.  If `membership` is `join`:
        1.  If the only previous event is an `m.room.create` and the
            `state_key` is the creator, allow.
        2.  If the `sender` does not match `state_key`, reject.
        3.  If the `sender` is banned, reject.
        4.  If the `join_rule` is `invite` then allow if membership
            state is `invite` or `join`.
        5.  If the `join_rule` is `public`, allow.
        6.  Otherwise, reject.
    3.  If `membership` is `invite`:
        1.  If `content` has `third_party_invite` key:
            1.  If *target user* is banned, reject.
            2.  If `content.third_party_invite` does not have a `signed`
                key, reject.
            3.  If `signed` does not have `mxid` and `token` keys,
                reject.
            4.  If `mxid` does not match `state_key`, reject.
            5.  If there is no `m.room.third_party_invite` event in the
                current room state with `state_key` matching `token`,
                reject.
            6.  If `sender` does not match `sender` of the
                `m.room.third_party_invite`, reject.
            7.  If any signature in `signed` matches any public key in
                the `m.room.third_party_invite` event, allow. The public
                keys are in `content` of `m.room.third_party_invite` as:
                1.  A single public key in the `public_key` field.
                2.  A list of public keys in the `public_keys` field.
            8.  Otherwise, reject.
        2.  If the `sender`'s current membership state is not `join`,
            reject.
        3.  If *target user*'s current membership state is `join` or
            `ban`, reject.
        4.  If the `sender`'s power level is greater than or equal to
            the *invite level*, allow.
        5.  Otherwise, reject.
    4.  If `membership` is `leave`:
        1.  If the `sender` matches `state_key`, allow if and only if
            that user's current membership state is `invite` or `join`.
        2.  If the `sender`'s current membership state is not `join`,
            reject.
        3.  If the *target user*'s current membership state is `ban`,
            and the `sender`'s power level is less than the *ban level*,
            reject.
        4.  If the `sender`'s power level is greater than or equal to
            the *kick level*, and the *target user*'s power level is
            less than the `sender`'s power level, allow.
        5.  Otherwise, reject.
    5.  If `membership` is `ban`:
        1.  If the `sender`'s current membership state is not `join`,
            reject.
        2.  If the `sender`'s power level is greater than or equal to
            the *ban level*, and the *target user*'s power level is less
            than the `sender`'s power level, allow.
        3.  Otherwise, reject.
    6.  Otherwise, the membership is unknown. Reject.
6.  If the `sender`'s current membership state is not `join`, reject.
7.  If type is `m.room.third_party_invite`:
    1.  Allow if and only if `sender`'s current power level is greater
        than or equal to the *invite level*.
8.  If the event type's *required power level* is greater than the
    `sender`'s power level, reject.
9.  If the event has a `state_key` that starts with an `@` and does not
    match the `sender`, reject.
10. If type is `m.room.power_levels`:
    1.  If `users` key in `content` is not a dictionary with keys that
        are valid user IDs with values that are integers (or a string
        that is an integer), reject.
    2.  If there is no previous `m.room.power_levels` event in the room,
        allow.
    3.  For the keys `users_default`, `events_default`, `state_default`,
        `ban`, `redact`, `kick`, `invite` check if they were added,
        changed or removed. For each found alteration:
        1.  If the current value is higher than the `sender`'s current
            power level, reject.
        2.  If the new value is higher than the `sender`'s current power
            level, reject.
    4.  For each entry being added, changed or removed in both the
        `events` and `users` keys:
        1.  If the current value is higher than the `sender`'s current
            power level, reject.
        2.  If the new value is higher than the `sender`'s current power
            level, reject.
    5.  For each entry being changed under the `users` key, other than
        the `sender`'s own entry:
        1.  If the current value is equal to the `sender`'s current
            power level, reject.
    6.  Otherwise, allow.
11. If type is `m.room.redaction`:
    1.  If the `sender`'s power level is greater than or equal to the
        *redact level*, allow.
    2.  If the domain of the `event_id` of the event being redacted is
        the same as the domain of the `event_id` of the
        `m.room.redaction`, allow.
    3.  Otherwise, reject.
12. Otherwise, allow.

Note

Some consequences of these rules:

-   Unless you are a member of the room, the only permitted operations
    (apart from the initial create/join) are: joining a public room;
    accepting or rejecting an invitation to a room.
-   To unban somebody, you must have power level greater than or equal
    to both the kick *and* ban levels, *and* greater than the target
    user's power level.

### Event format

Events in version 1 rooms have the following structure:

{{definition\_ss\_pdu}}

### Canonical JSON

Servers MUST NOT strictly enforce the JSON format specified in the
[appendices](../appendices.html#canonical-json) for the reasons
described there.
