.. Copyright 2017,2019 New Vector Ltd
..
.. Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
.. you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
.. You may obtain a copy of the License at
..
..     http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
..
.. Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
.. distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
.. WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
.. See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
.. limitations under the License.

Room Version 1
==============

This room version is the first ever version for rooms, and contains the building
blocks for other room versions.

.. contents:: Table of Contents
.. sectnum::

Server implementation components
--------------------------------

.. WARNING::
   The information contained in this section is strictly for server implementors.
   Applications which use the Client-Server API are generally unaffected by the
   details contained here, and can safely ignore their presence.


The algorithms defined here should only apply to version 1 rooms. Other algorithms
may be used by other room versions, and as such servers should be aware of which
version room they are dealing with prior to executing a given algorithm.

.. WARNING::
   Although room version 1 is the most popular room version, it is known to have
   undesirable effects. Servers implementing support for room version 1 should be
   aware that restrictions should be generally relaxed and that inconsistencies
   may occur until room version 2 (or later) is ready and adopted.

State resolution
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. WARNING::
  This section documents the state resolution algorithm as implemented by
  Synapse as of December 2017 (and therefore the de-facto Matrix protocol).
  However, this algorithm is known to have some problems.

The room state :math:`S'(E)` after an event :math:`E` is defined in terms of
the room state :math:`S(E)` before :math:`E`, and depends on whether
:math:`E` is a state event or a message event:

* If :math:`E` is a message event, then :math:`S'(E) = S(E)`.

* If :math:`E` is a state event, then :math:`S'(E)` is :math:`S(E)`, except
  that its entry corresponding to :math:`E`'s ``event_type`` and ``state_key``
  is replaced by :math:`E`'s ``event_id``.

The room state :math:`S(E)` before :math:`E` is the *resolution* of the set of
states :math:`\{ S'(E'), S'(E''), … \}` consisting of the states after each of
:math:`E`'s ``prev_event``\s :math:`\{ E', E'', … \}`.

The *resolution* of a set of states is defined as follows.  The resolved state
is built up in a number of passes; here we use :math:`R` to refer to the
results of the resolution so far.

* Start by setting :math:`R` to the union of the states to be resolved,
  excluding any *conflicting* events.

* First we resolve conflicts between ``m.room.power_levels`` events. If there
  is no conflict, this step is skipped, otherwise:

  * Assemble all the ``m.room.power_levels`` events from the states to
    be resolved into a list.

  * Sort the list by ascending ``depth`` then descending ``sha1(event_id)``.

  * Add the first event in the list to :math:`R`.

  * For each subsequent event in the list, check that the event would be
    allowed by the authorization rules for a room in state :math:`R`. If the
    event would be allowed, then update :math:`R` with the event and continue
    with the next event in the list. If it would not be allowed, stop and
    continue below with ``m.room.join_rules`` events.

* Repeat the above process for conflicts between ``m.room.join_rules`` events.

* Repeat the above process for conflicts between ``m.room.member`` events.

* No other events affect the authorization rules, so for all other conflicts,
  just pick the event with the highest depth and lowest ``sha1(event_id)`` that
  passes authentication in :math:`R` and add it to :math:`R`.

A *conflict* occurs between states where those states have different
``event_ids`` for the same ``(state_type, state_key)``. The events thus
affected are said to be *conflicting* events.


Authorization rules
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The types of state events that affect authorization are:

- ``m.room.create``
- ``m.room.member``
- ``m.room.join_rules``
- ``m.room.power_levels``
- ``m.room.third_party_invite``

.. NOTE::

  Power levels are inferred from defaults when not explicitly supplied.
  For example, mentions of the ``sender``'s power level can also refer 
  to the default power level for users in the room.

The rules are as follows:

1. If type is ``m.room.create``:

   a. If it has any previous events, reject.
   b. If the domain of the ``room_id`` does not match the domain of the
      ``sender``, reject.
   c. If ``content.room_version`` is present and is not a recognised version,
      reject.
   d. If ``content`` has no ``creator`` field, reject.
   e. Otherwise, allow.

#. Reject if event has ``auth_events`` that:

   a. have duplicate entries for a given ``type`` and ``state_key`` pair
   #. have entries whose ``type`` and ``state_key`` don't match those
      specified by the `auth events selection`_ algorithm described in the
      server specification.

#. If event does not have a ``m.room.create`` in its ``auth_events``, reject.

#. If type is ``m.room.aliases``:

   a. If event has no ``state_key``, reject.
   b. If sender's domain doesn't matches ``state_key``, reject.
   c. Otherwise, allow.

#. If type is ``m.room.member``:

   a. If no ``state_key`` key or ``membership`` key in ``content``, reject.

   #. If ``membership`` is ``join``:

      i. If the only previous event is an ``m.room.create``
         and the ``state_key`` is the creator, allow.

      #. If the ``sender`` does not match ``state_key``, reject.

      #. If the ``sender`` is banned, reject.

      #. If the ``join_rule`` is ``invite`` then allow if membership state
         is ``invite`` or ``join``.

      #. If the ``join_rule`` is ``public``, allow.

      #. Otherwise, reject.

   #. If ``membership`` is ``invite``:

      i. If ``content`` has ``third_party_invite`` key:

         #. If *target user* is banned, reject.

         #. If ``content.third_party_invite`` does not have a
            ``signed`` key, reject.

         #. If ``signed`` does not have ``mxid`` and ``token`` keys, reject.

         #. If ``mxid`` does not match ``state_key``, reject.

         #. If there is no ``m.room.third_party_invite`` event in the
            current room state with ``state_key`` matching ``token``, reject.

         #. If ``sender`` does not match ``sender`` of the
            ``m.room.third_party_invite``, reject.

         #. If any signature in ``signed`` matches any public key in the
            ``m.room.third_party_invite`` event, allow. The public keys are
            in ``content`` of ``m.room.third_party_invite`` as:

            #. A single public key in the ``public_key`` field.
            #. A list of public keys in the ``public_keys`` field.

         #. Otherwise, reject.

      #. If the ``sender``'s current membership state is not ``join``, reject.

      #. If *target user*'s current membership state is ``join`` or ``ban``,
         reject.

      #. If the ``sender``'s power level is greater than or equal to the *invite
         level*, allow.

      #. Otherwise, reject.

   #. If ``membership`` is ``leave``:

      i. If the ``sender`` matches ``state_key``, allow if and only if that user's
         current membership state is ``invite`` or ``join``.

      #. If the ``sender``'s current membership state is not ``join``, reject.

      #. If the *target user*'s current membership state is ``ban``, and the
         ``sender``'s power level is less than the *ban level*, reject.

      #. If the ``sender``'s power level is greater than or equal to the *kick
         level*, and the *target user*'s power level is less than the
         ``sender``'s power level, allow.

      #. Otherwise, reject.

   #. If ``membership`` is ``ban``:

      i. If the ``sender``'s current membership state is not ``join``, reject.

      #. If the ``sender``'s power level is greater than or equal to the *ban
         level*, and the *target user*'s power level is less than the
         ``sender``'s power level, allow.

      #. Otherwise, reject.

   #. Otherwise, the membership is unknown. Reject.

#. If the ``sender``'s current membership state is not ``join``, reject.

#. If type is ``m.room.third_party_invite``:

   a. Allow if and only if ``sender``'s current power level is greater than
      or equal to the *invite level*.

#. If the event type's *required power level* is greater than the ``sender``'s power
   level, reject.

#. If the event has a ``state_key`` that starts with an ``@`` and does not match
   the ``sender``, reject.

#. If type is ``m.room.power_levels``:

   a. If ``users`` key in ``content`` is not a dictionary with keys that are
      valid user IDs with values that are integers (or a string that is an
      integer), reject.

   #. If there is no previous ``m.room.power_levels`` event in the room, allow.

   #. For the keys ``users_default``, ``events_default``,
      ``state_default``, ``ban``, ``redact``, ``kick``, ``invite`` check if they 
      were added, changed or removed. For each found alteration:

      i. If the current value is higher than the ``sender``'s current power level,
         reject.

      #. If the new value is higher than the ``sender``'s current power level,
         reject.
         
   #. For each entry being added, changed or removed in both the ``events`` and 
      ``users`` keys:
      
      i. If the current value is higher than the ``sender``'s current power level,
         reject.
         
      #. If the new value is higher than the ``sender``'s current power level,
         reject.

   #. For each entry being changed under the ``users`` key, other than the
      ``sender``'s own entry:

      i. If the current value is equal to the ``sender``'s current power level,
         reject.

   #. Otherwise, allow.

#. If type is ``m.room.redaction``:

   a. If the ``sender``'s power level is greater than or equal to the *redact
      level*, allow.

   #. If the domain of the ``event_id`` of the event being redacted is the same
      as the domain of the ``event_id`` of the ``m.room.redaction``, allow.

   #. Otherwise, reject.

#. Otherwise, allow.

.. NOTE::

  Some consequences of these rules:

  *  Unless you are a member of the room, the only permitted operations (apart
    from the initial create/join) are: joining a public room; accepting or
    rejecting an invitation to a room.

  * To unban somebody, you must have power level greater than or equal to both
    the kick *and* ban levels, *and* greater than the target user's power
    level.

Event format
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Events in version 1 rooms have the following structure:

{{definition_ss_pdu}}


.. _`auth events selection`: ../server_server/%SERVER_RELEASE_LABEL%.html#auth-events-selection
.. _`Signing Events`: ../server_server/%SERVER_RELEASE_LABEL%.html#signing-events
