# MSC 2666: Get rooms in common with another user

It is useful to be able to fetch rooms you have in common with another user. Popular messaging
services such as Telegram offer users the ability to show "groups in common", which allows users to
determine what they have in common before participating in conversation.

There are a variety of applications for this information. Some users may want to block invites from
users they do not share a room with at the client level, and need a way to poll the homeserver for
this information. Another use case would be trying to determine how a user came across your MXID, as
invites on their own do not present much context. With this endpoint, a client could tell you what
rooms you have in common before you accept an invite.

While this information can be determined if the user has full access to member state for all rooms,
modern clients often implement
[lazy-loading of room members](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.3/client-server-api/#lazy-loading-room-members),
so they often only have a subset of state for the rooms the user is in. Therefore, the homeserver
should have a means to provide this information.

This proposal aims to implement a simple mechanism to fetch rooms you have in common with another
user.

## Proposal

Homeservers will implement a new endpoint `/_matrix/client/v1/mutual_rooms`.

This endpoint will take a query parameter of `user_id` which will contain the MXID of the user
matched against.

This endpoint can be rate limited and requires authentication.
Guests are not allowed to use the endpoint, as guests will usually not join multiple rooms.

The response format will be an array containing all rooms where both the authenticated user and
`user_id` have a membership of type `join`.

If the `user_id` does not exist, or does not share any rooms with the authenticated user,
an empty array should be returned.

Handling invalid user IDs may result in an error, is likely implementation-specific,
and is beyond the scope of this proposal. Implementations are also free to simply
return a success response with an empty array for invalid user IDs.

```http
GET /_matrix/client/v1/user/mutual_rooms?user_id=%40bob%3Aexample.com
```

```json
{
  "joined": [
    "!OGEhHVWSdvArJzumhm:matrix.org",
    "!HYlSnuBHTxUPgyZPKC:half-shot.uk",
    "!DueayyFpVTeVOQiYjR:example.com"
  ]
}
```

The server may decide that the response to this endpoint is too large, and thus an optional key
`"next_batch"` can be inserted, which the client has to pass to `from` in the query
parameters together with the original `user_id` to fetch the next batch of responses. This will
continue until the server does no longer insert `"next_batch"`. The `next_batch` field follows
the [standard for opaque identifiers](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.16/appendices/#opaque-identifiers).

```json5
{
  "joined": [
    // ...
  ],
  "next_batch": "<an opaque identifier, containing only the characters [0-9a-zA-Z._~-], non-empty if not omitted, and at most 255 characters>"
}
```

The batch tokens this endpoint generates are only valid for this endpoint.

The response error for when the given `from` batch token is invalid will be a response with HTTP code 400,
with `M_INVALID_PARAM` as `errcode`.

The response error for trying to get shared rooms with yourself will be an HTTP code 400, with
`M_UNKNOWN` as the `errcode`. And the error description may be "you cannot request rooms in common with yourself".

Tokens generated by this endpoint must be valid for at least 10 minutes, after which, tokens can expire.
Expired tokens must be handled similar to invalid tokens, as described above.

## Potential issues

Homeserver performance and storage may be impacted by this endpoint. While a homeserver already
stores membership information for each of its users, the information may not be stored in a way that
is readily accessible. Homeservers that have implemented
[POST /user_directory/search](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.3/client-server-api/#post_matrixclientv3user_directorysearch)
may have started some of this work, if they are limiting users to searching for users for which they
share rooms. While this is not a given by any means, it may mean that implementations of this API
and /search may be complimentary.

## Alternatives

A client which holds full and current state can already see all membership for all rooms, and thus
determine which of those rooms contains a "join" membership for the given user_id. Clients which "lazy-load"
however do not have this information, as they will have only synced a subset of the full membership for
all rooms. While a client *could* pull all membership for all rooms at the point of needing this information,
it's computationally expensive for both the homeserver and the client, as well as a bandwidth waste for constrained
clients.

## Forward-compatibility considerations

There possibly comes a time where it's desirable to query mutual rooms for more-than-one other user,
where multiple people (including the self-user) are matched against for which rooms all of them
share.

Because of that, the endpoint accepts a query parameter, however, it will only accept *one* query
parameter for the time being. In the future this restriction can be lifted to accept multiple query
parameters under `user_id`

## Security considerations

The information provided in this endpoint is already accessible to the client if it has a copy of all
state that the user can see. This endpoint only makes it possible to get this information without having
to request all state ahead of time.

As mentioned earlier, servers should return an empty array for non-existent users to avoid leaking
existence of other users. If necessary, servers MAY also add random delays to responses to combat
timing attacks.

## Unstable prefix

The implementation MUST use `/_matrix/client/unstable/uk.half-shot.msc2666/user/mutual_rooms`.

The /versions endpoint MUST include a new key in `unstable_features` with the name
`uk.half-shot.msc2666.query_mutual_rooms`.

Previous iterations of this MSC has used the following `unstable_features` key(s):
- `uk.half-shot.msc2666.mutual_rooms`
- `uk.half-shot.msc2666`

If the value is false or the key is not present, clients MUST assume the feature is not available.

Once the MSC has been merged, and the homeserver has advertised support for the Matrix version that
this endpoint is included in, clients should use `/_matrix/client/v1/mutual_rooms` and will no
longer need to check for the `unstable_features` flag.
