# MSC3903: X25519 Elliptic-curve Diffie-Hellman ephemeral for establishing secure channel between two Matrix clients

In MSCyyyy (to be published) a proposal is made to allow a user to login on a new device using an existing device by
means of scanning a QR code.

[MSC3886](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/3886) already proposes a simple unsecured rendezvous protocol.

In this proposal we build a secure layer on top of MSC3886 to allow for trusted out-of-bands communication between two
Matrix clients.

It is notable that the combination of this proposal and [MSC3886](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/3886)
provides a similar capability to the existing
[Send-to-Device messaging](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.4/client-server-api/#send-to-device-messaging) feature. See the
alternatives section for more on this.

## Proposal

The proposal is to use X25519 to agree a shared secret that is then used to perform AES.

All payloads are transmitted as JSON and could be done over any bidirectional transport including
[MSC3886](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/3886) or elsewhere in Matrix.

**1a.** The initiator generates a ephemeral Curve25519 private key `privateA`. This key should never be re-used.

**1b.** The initiator derives the public key from `privateA` as `publicA = scalarMult(privateA, 9)`

**1c.** The initiator shares it's key with the recipient via a trusted medium using the following payload:

```json
{
    "algorithm": "m.rendezvous.v1.curve25519-aes-sha256",
    "key": "gRr3uZSpm2qz37CkqnrhZTW3H0JQvc6l4HYOtBULNSU="
}
```

The `key` is the base64-encoded value for `publicA` (the x co-ordinate of the curve).

It's critical that the initiator public key `publicA` is transmitted via a trusted medium such as a QR code or some other
already-authenticated channel, and not via the unauthenticated channel.

**2.** The recipient similarly generates a private key `privateB`, derives the public key `publicB` and shares is using
the same structure of payload:

```json
{
    "algorithm": "m.rendezvous.v1.curve25519-aes-sha256",
    "key": "E03zK4t29xyiXlt54kOVpIzNtGytjQSvaHXF8n8tTBs="
}
```

Unlike `publicA` the recipient public key `publicB` does not need to be transmitted via a trusted medium.

**3.** Both sides derive the same shared secret as follows:

Initiator: `sharedSecret = scalarMult(privateA, publicB) = scalarMult(privateA, scalarMult(privateB, 9))`

Recipient: `sharedSecret = scalarMult(privateB, publicA) = scalarMult(privateB, scalarMult(privateA, 9))`

**4.** Both sides then derive a 256 bit AES key using HKDF SHA-256 with a salt of 8 bytes of zero (i.e. `[0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]`)
and info of `<algorithm>|<base64-encoded initiator public key>|<base64-encoded recipient public key>`.

For the above example keys the info would be: `m.rendezvous.v1.curve25519-aes-sha256|gRr3uZSpm2qz37CkqnrhZTW3H0JQvc6l4HYOtBULNSU=|E03zK4t29xyiXlt54kOVpIzNtGytjQSvaHXF8n8tTBs=`.

**5.** Subsequent payloads are then sent encrypted using 256 bit AES-GCM using a 256 bit random initialisation vector and 128 bit authentication tag.

**6.** Encrypted payloads are then encoded and transmitted by either party as follows:

```json
{
    "ciphertext": "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",
    "iv": "Fk/2eSQ2hANwpQhAI94/BQ=="
}
```

- `ciphertext` - base64-encoded(AES-GCM ciphertext concatenated with the authentication tag)
- `iv` - base64-encoded(initialization vector)

This means that for AES-GCM implementations that require the authentication tag to be explicitly processed (e.g. CryptoKit on iOS) that it can be sourced from the last 16 bytes of the base64-decoded `ciphertext`.

**7.** The user should confirm that the established channel is secure by means of a checksum derived from the shared key.
The checksum is 12 numeric digits in the form `1234-5678-9012` and should be displayed on both devices for the user to
visually verify.

The checksum should be derived in a similar manner to step **4** above, however only 40 bit should be derived this time.
The salt and info are the same as before.

The decimal representation of the 40 bits is calculated using the method described in
https://spec.matrix.org/v1.4/client-server-api/#sas-method-decimal.

Steps **1** and **2** can happen simultaneously or in any order.

## Potential issues

This proposal introduces yet another key that Matrix client implementations need awareness of. It's also not clear to me
where exactly this would fit in the spec documents.

## Alternatives

### Send-to-Device messaging

Whilst to-device messaging already provides a mechanism for secure communication between two Matrix clients/devices, a
key consideration for the anticipated login with QR capability is that one of the clients is not yet authenticated with
a Homeserver.

Furthermore the client might not know which Homeserver the user wishes to connect to.

Conceptually, one could create a new type of "guest" login that would allow the unauthenticated client to connect to a
Homeserver for the purposes of communicating with an existing authenticated client via to-device messages.

Some considerations for this:

Where the "actual" Homeserver is not known then the "guest" Homeserver nominated by the new client would need to be federated
with the "actual" Homeserver.

The "guest" Homeserver would probably want to automatically clean up the "guest" accounts after a short period of time.

The "actual" Homeserver operator might not want to open up full "guest" access so a second type of "guest" account might
be required.

Does the new device/client need to accept the T&Cs of the "guest" Homeserver?

### Naming convention

The algorithm name is arbitrary.

Alternative key exchange algorithms to X25519 could be used. Alternative symmetric ciphers to AES-GCM could be used. The
purpose of the `algorithm` field is allow for alternative algorithms in the future.

## Security considerations

Algorithm selection and implementation are crucial.

## Unstable prefix

TBD

## Dependencies

Although this proposal can be used over any other insecure channel, the anticipated use case is over
[MSC3886](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/3886).

Furthermore without the (as yet unpublished) MSCyyyy proposal, there are no other implementations/uses of the proposal.
