# MSC4140: Cancellable delayed events

This MSC proposes a mechanism by which a Matrix client can schedule an event to be sent into a room at a later time.

The client does not have to be running or in contact with the homeserver at the time that the event is actually sent.

Once the event has been scheduled, the user's homeserver is responsible for actually sending the event at the appropriate
time and then distributing it as normal via federation.

## Background and motivation

This proposal originates from the needs of VoIP signalling in Matrix:

The Client-Server API currently has a  [Voice over IP module](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.16/client-server-api/#voice-over-ip)
that uses room messages to communicate the call state. However, it only allows for calls with two participants.

[MSC3401: Native Group VoIP Signalling](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/3401) proposes a scheme
that allows for more than two participants by using room state events.

In this arrangement each device signals its participant in a call by sending a state event that represents the device's
"membership" of a call. Once the device is no longer in the call, it sends a new state event to update the call state and
communicate that the device is no longer a member.

This works well when the client is running and can send the state events as needed. However, if the client is not able to
communicate with the homeserver (e.g. the user closes the app or loses connection) the call state is not updated to say
that the participant has left.

The motivation for this MSC is to allow updating call membership events after the user disconnected by allowing to
schedule/delay/timeout/expire events in a generic way.

[MSC4143: MatrixRTC](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4143) has more details on the use case.

There are numerous possible solutions to solve the call membership expiration. They are covered in detail
in the [use case specific considerations/MatrixRTC](#matrixrtc) section, because they are not part
of this proposal.

This proposal enables a Matrix client to schedule a "hangup" event to be sent after a specified time period.
The client can then periodically restart the timer whilst it is running. If the client is no longer running
or able to communicate, then the timer would expire and the homeserver would send the "hangup" event on behalf of the client.

Such an arrangement can also be described as a "heartbeat" mechanism. The client sends a "heartbeat" to the homeserver
in the form of a "restart" of the delayed event to keep the call "alive".
The homeserver will automatically send the "hangup" if it does not receive a "heartbeat".

## Proposal

The following operations are added to the client-server API:

- Schedule an event to be sent at a later time
- Get a list of delayed events
- Restart the timer of a delayed event
- Send the delayed event immediately
- Cancel a delayed event so that it is never sent

At the point of an event being scheduled the homeserver is [unable to allocate the event ID](#allocating-the-event-id-at-the-point-of-scheduling-the-send).
Instead, the homeserver allocates a `delay_id` to the scheduled event which is used during the above API operations.

### Scheduling a delayed event

A new endpoint is introduced for scheduling the sending of a message or state event:

`PUT /_matrix/client/v3/rooms/{roomId}/delayed_event/{eventType}/{txnId}`

The path parameters of this endpoint are the same as for the existing
[`PUT /_matrix/client/v3/rooms/{roomId}/send/{eventType}/{txnId}`](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.16/client-server-api/#put_matrixclientv3roomsroomidsendeventtypetxnid)
endpoint. It also makes use of [transaction identifiers](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.16/client-server-api/#transaction-identifiers).

The body for requests to this endpoint is a JSON object containing the following fields:

- `delay` - Required. A positive non-zero number of milliseconds the homeserver should wait before sending the event.
- `state_key` - Optional. The state key for the event to be sent, if it is to be a state event.
- `content` - Required. The content of the event to be sent.

The homeserver schedules the event to be sent with the specified delay and responds with an
opaque `delay_id` field (omitting the `event_id` as it is not available):

```http
200 OK
Content-Type: application/json

{
  "delay_id": "1234567890"
}
```

The `delay_id` is an [opaque identifier](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.16/appendices/#opaque-identifiers) generated by the server.
It MUST be globally unique and SHOULD be as difficult to guess/craft as an access token, so that knowledge of a `delay_id` may
securely grant control of it via [the management endpoint](#managing-delayed-events).

The server MAY round the delay up to a maximum of 30 seconds away from the request.

If the requested delay exceeds the maximum delay defined by the homeserver, the server will respond with HTTP 400,
a new `M_MAX_DELAY_EXCEEDED` error code, and the maximum allowed delay in milliseconds in a new `max_delay` field.

For example, the following specifies a maximum delay of 24 hours:

```http
400 Bad Request
Content-Type: application/json

{
  "errcode": "M_MAX_DELAY_EXCEEDED",
  "error": "The requested delay exceeds the allowed maximum.",
  "max_delay": 86400000
}
```

The homeserver **should** apply rate limiting to the scheduling of delayed events to provide mitigation against the
[High Volume of Messages](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.16/appendices/#threat-high-volume-of-messages) threat.

If the user has too many outstanding delayed events, the server will respond with HTTP 400 and a new
`M_MAX_DELAYED_EVENTS_EXCEEDED` error code:

```http
400 Bad Request
Content-Type: application/json

{
  "errcode": "M_MAX_DELAYED_EVENTS_EXCEEDED",
  "error": "The maximum number of delayed events has been reached.",
}
```

### Managing delayed events

A set of new unauthenticated client-server API endpoints at `POST /_matrix/client/v1/delayed_events/{delay_id}/[send|cancel|restart]` allows scheduled events
to be managed.

The final path component of these endpoints specifies the action to take on the delayed event:

- `send` - Send the delayed event immediately instead of waiting for the delay time to be reached.
- `cancel` - Cancel the delayed event so that it is never sent.
- `restart` - Reset the send time to be `now + original_delay`.

For example, the following would send the delayed event with delay ID `1234567890` immediately:

```http
POST /_matrix/client/v1/delayed_events/1234567890/send
Content-Type: application/json

{
}
```

These endpoints are unauthenticated so that control over a particular delayed event may be
[delegated to an external service](#delegating-delayed-events)
by sharing the target delayed event's `delay_id` with the service.

Where the action is `send`, the homeserver **should** apply rate limiting to provide mitigation against the
[High Volume of Messages](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.16/appendices/#threat-high-volume-of-messages) threat.

The server will respond with HTTP 404 and an `M_NOT_FOUND` error if the `delay_id` is not recognized or was already cancelled.

The success response body is always an empty object. A future MSC may define additional keys, such as returning
the event ID for `send` or the new expected send time for `restart`.

To allow safely retrying requests, the `send` action should return HTTP 200 even if the event was already sent
successfully by a previous request or by the delay timing out.

If sending the event via a `send` call fails, or if the event already failed previously, the endpoint returns the error
that happened while sending the event (e.g. HTTP 403 and `M_FORBIDDEN` if the user doesn't have permission to send the event).

The primary point of rate limiting is event sending when the delay times out or the event is sent using the `send`
action. However, servers can choose to rate limit the management endpoints themselves as well if necessary.

#### Delegating delayed events

It is useful for external services to also interact with delayed events. If a client disconnects, an external service can
be the best source to send the delayed event/"last will".

To permit this, the `delay_id` that uniquely identifies a delayed event also behaves as a scoped access token
that only allows to interact with the `POST /delayed_events` endpoints on that specific `delay_id`.

With this, an SFU that tracks the current client connection state could be given the power to control the delayed event.
The client would share the `delay_id` and the required details, so that the SFU can call the
`POST /delayed_events/{delay_id}/refresh` endpoint while a user is connected
and can call the `POST /delayed_events/{delay_id}/send` endpoint once the user disconnects.
This way, the SFU can be used as the source of truth for the call membership events without knowing anything about
the Matrix call.

Since the SFU has a much lower chance of running into a network issue,
`POST /delayed_events/{delay_id}/restart` calls may be sent much more infrequently.
Instead of calling that endpoint every couple of seconds, a delayed event's
timeout can be set to be long (e.g. 6 hours), as the SFU can be expected to not forget sending the `POST /delayed_events/{delay_id}/send` requests
when it detects a disconnecting client.

### Getting delayed events

The new authenticated client-server API endpoint `GET /_matrix/client/v1/delayed_events` allows clients to get a list of
all the delayed events owned by the requesting user that have been scheduled to send, have been sent, or failed to be sent.

The endpoint accepts a query parameter of `status` with a value of either `"scheduled"` or `"finalised"`
to filter the response on either delayed events that are scheduled to be sent (`"scheduled"`),
or ones that have been sent or failed be sent due to cancellation or an error (`"finalised"`).
Without this parameter, delayed events of all status types are included in the response.
Requests that set this parameter to an unsupported value will respond with HTTP 400 and `M_UNKNOWN`.

The endpoint accepts a query parameter of `delay_id=<delay_id>` to filter the response on delayed events with a matching ID.
This parameter may be specified multiple times to filter on multiple matching IDs.

The endpoint accepts a query parameter `from` which is a token that can be used to paginate the list of delayed events as
per the [pagination convention](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.16/appendices/#pagination). The homeserver can choose a suitable
page size.

The response is a JSON object containing the following fields:

- `scheduled` - Required if the request has no `status` parameter, or sets it to `"scheduled"`.
An array of objects describing delayed events that have been scheduled to be sent,
sorted by `running_since + delay` in increasing order (event that will timeout soonest first).
These objects contain the following fields:
  - `delay_id` - Required. The ID of the delayed event.
  - `room_id` - Required. The room ID of the delayed event.
  - `type` - Required. The event type of the delayed event.
  - `state_key` - Optional. The state key of the delayed event if it is a state event.
  - `delay` - Required. The delay in milliseconds before the event is to be sent.
  - `running_since` - Required. The timestamp (as Unix time in milliseconds) when the delayed event was scheduled or
    last restarted.
  - `content` - Required. The content of the delayed event. This is the body of the original `PUT` request, not a preview
  of the full event after sending.
- `finalised` - Required if the request has no `status` parameter, or sets it to `"finalised"`.
An array of objects describing delayed events that have either been sent, cancelled, or were not sent due to an error,
sorted by `origin_server_ts` in decreasing order (latest finalised event first).
These objects contain the following fields:
  - `delayed_event` - Required. Describes the original delayed event in the same format as the items in the `scheduled` array.
  - `outcome`: `"send"|"cancel"` - Whether the delayed event was sent, or was cancelled by an error or [the management endpoint](#managing-delayed-events) with an `action` of `"cancel"`.
  - `reason`: `"error"|"action"|"delay"` - What caused the delayed event to become finalised. `"error"` means the delayed event failed to be sent due to an error; `"action"` means it was sent or cancelled by [the management endpoint](#managing-delayed-events); and `"delay"` means it was sent automatically on its scheduled delivery time.
  - `error` - Optional. A Matrix error (as defined by [Standard error response](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.16/client-server-api/#standard-error-response))
  to explain why this event failed to be sent.
  - `event_id` - Optional. The `event_id` this event got in case it was sent.
  - `origin_server_ts` - Required. The timestamp of when the event was finalised.
- `next_batch` - Optional. A token that can be used to paginate the list of delayed events.

The batch size and the amount of terminated events that stay on the homeserver can be chosen, by the homeserver.
The recommended values are:

- batch size: 10
- `finalised` retention: 7 days
- `finalised` max cached events per user: 1000

There is no guarantee for a client that all events will be available in the
finalised events list if they exceed the limits of their homeserver.
Additionally, a homeserver may discard finalised delayed events that have been returned by a
`GET /_matrix/client/v1/delayed_events?status=finalised` response.

The homeserver **should** apply rate limiting to the `finalised` and `scheduled` delayed events `GET` endpoints.
Both most likely require (dependent on the implementation) serialization steps and can be used to slow down the server.

An example for a response to the `GET /_matrix/client/v1/delayed_events?status=scheduled` endpoint:

```http
200 OK
Content-Type: application/json

{
  "scheduled": [
    {
      "delay_id": "1234567890",
      "room_id": "!roomid:example.com",
      "type": "m.room.message",
      "delay": 15000,
      "running_since": 1721732853284,
      "content":{
        "msgtype": "m.text",
        "body": "I am now offline"
      }
    },
    {
      "delay_id": "abcdefgh",
      "room_id": "!roomid:example.com",
      "type": "m.rtc.member",
      "state_key": "@user:example.com_DEVICEID",
      "delay": 5000,
      "running_since": 1721732853284,
      "content":{
        "application": "m.call",
        "call_id": "",
        ...
      }
    }
  ],
  "next_batch": "b12345"
}
```

Unless the delayed event is updated beforehand, the event will be sent after `running_since` + `delay`.

This can be used by clients to display events that have been scheduled to be sent in the future.

For use cases where the existence of a delayed event is also of interest for other room members
(e.g. self-destructing messages), it is recommended to include this information in the original/affected event itself.

### Homeserver implementation details

#### Power levels are evaluated at the point of sending

Power levels are evaluated for each event only once the delay has occurred and it will be distributed/inserted into the
DAG. This implies a delayed event can fail if it violates power levels at the time the delay passes.

Conversely, it's also possible to successfully schedule an event that the user has no permission to send at the time of sending.
If the power level situation has changed at the time the delay passes, the event can even reach the DAG.

#### Rate-limiting at the point of sending

Further to the rate limiting of the API endpoints, the homeserver **should** apply rate limiting to the sending
of delayed messages at the point that they are inserted into the DAG.

This is to provide mitigation against the
[High Volume of Messages](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.16/appendices/#threat-high-volume-of-messages) threat where a malicious
actor could schedule a large volume of events ahead of time without exceeding a rate limit on the initial `PUT` request,
but has specified a `delay` that corresponds to a common point of time in the future.

A limit on the maximum number of delayed events that can be outstanding at one time could also provide some mitigation against
this attack.

### Guest accounts

All delayed event related endpoints are available to guest accounts.
This allows guest accounts to participate in MatrixRTC sessions.

## Use case specific considerations

Delayed events can be used for many different features: tea timers, reminders, or ephemeral events could be implemented
using delayed events, where clients send room events with
intentional mentions or a redaction as a delayed event.
It can even be used to send temporal power levels/mutes or bans.

### MatrixRTC

In this section, an overview is given how this MSC is used in [MSC4143: MatrixRTC](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4143)
and alternative expiration systems are evaluated.

#### Background

MatrixRTC makes it necessary to have real time information about the current MatrixRTC session.
To properly display room tiles and header in the room list (or compute a list of ongoing calls), it's required to know:

- If there is a running session.
- What type that session has.
- Who and how many people are currently participating.

A particular delicate situation is that clients are not able to inform others if they lose connection.
There are numerous approaches to solve such a situation. They split into two categories:

- Polling based
  - Ask the users if they are still connected.
  - Ask an RTC backend (SFU) who is connected.
- Timeout based
  - Update the room state every x seconds.
    This allows clients to check how long an event has not been updated and ignore it if it's expired.
  - Use delayed events with a 10s timeout to send the disconnected from call
    in less then 10s after the user is not anymore pinging the `/delayed_events` endpoint
    (or delegate the disconnect action to a service attached to the SFU).
  - Use the client sync loop as a special case timeout for call member events
    (see [Alternatives/MSC4018 (use client sync loop))](#msc4018-use-client-sync-loop)).

Polling based solutions have a large overhead in complexity and network requests on the clients.
For example:

> A room list with 100 rooms where there has been a call before in every room
> (or there is an ongoing call) would require the client to send a to-device message
> (or a request to the SFU) to every user that has an active state event to check if
> they are still online. All this is just to display the room tile properly.

For displaying the room list, timeout based approaches are much more reasonable because they allow computing MatrixRTC
metadata for a room to be synchronous.

The current solution updates the room state every X minutes.
This is not elegant since room state gets repeatedly sent with the same content.
In large calls, this could result in high traffic and increase the size of the room DAG.

A call with 100 call members implies 100 state events every X minutes. X cannot be a
long duration because
it is the duration after which the event can be considered expired. Improper
disconnects would result in the user being displayed as "still in the call" for
X minutes (which should be as short as possible).

Additionally, this approach requires perfect server client time synchronization to compute the expiration.
This is currently not possible over federation since `unsigned.age` is not available over federation.

#### How this MSC would be used for MatrixRTC

With this proposal, the client can use delayed events to implement a "heartbeat" mechanism.

On joining the call, the client sends a "join" state event as normal to indicate that it is participating:

```http
PUT /_matrix/client/v3/rooms/!wherever:example.com/state/m.rtc.member/@someone:example.com
Content-Type: application/json

{
  "application": "m.call",
  "call_id": "",
  ...
}
```

Before sending the join event, it also schedules a delayed "hangup" state event with `delay` of around 5-20 seconds that
marks the end of its participation:

```http
PUT /_matrix/client/v3/rooms/!wherever:example.com/delayed_event/m.rtc.member/txn0
Content-Type: application/json

{
  "delay": 10000,
  "state_key": "@someone:example.com",
  "content": {
    "application": "m.call",
    "call_id": "",
    ...
  }
}
```

Let's say the homeserver returns a `delay_id` of `1234567890`.

The client then periodically sends a "heartbeat" in the form of a "restart" of the delayed "hangup" state event to keep
the call membership "alive".

For example it could make the request every 5 seconds (or some other period less than the `delay`):

```http
POST /_matrix/client/v1/delayed_events/1234567890/restart
Content-Type: application/json

{
}
```

This would have the effect that if the homeserver does not receive a "heartbeat" from the client for 10 seconds, then
it will automatically send the "hangup" state event for the client.

Since the delayed event is sent first, a client can guarantee (at the time they are sending
the join event) that it will eventually leave.

### Self-destructing messages

This MSC also allows an implementation of "self-destructing" messages using redaction:

First send (or generate the PDU when
[MSC4080: Cryptographic Identities](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4080)
is available):
`PUT /_matrix/client/v3/rooms/{roomId}/send/m.room.message/{txnId}`

```jsonc
{
  "msgtype": "m.text",
  "body": "this message will self-redact in 10 minutes"
}
```

then send:
`PUT /_matrix/client/v3/rooms/{roomId}/delayed_event/m.room.redaction/{txnId}`

```jsonc
{
  "delay": 600000,
  "content": {
    "redacts": "{event_id}"
  }
}
```

This would redact the message with content: `"m.text": "my msg"` after 10 minutes.

## Potential issues

### Compatibility with Cryptographic Identities

Ideally, this proposal should be compatible with other proposals such as
[MSC4080: Cryptographic Identities](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4080) which introduce mechanisms
to allow the recipient of an event to determine whether it was sent by a client as opposed to have been spoofed/injected
by a malicious homeserver.

In the context of this proposal, the delayed events should be signed with the same cryptographic identity as the client
that scheduled them.

This means that the content of the original scheduled event must be sent "as is" without modification by the homeserver.
The consequence is an implementation detail that client developers must be aware of: if the content of the delayed
event contains a timestamp, then it would be the timestamp of when the event was originally scheduled rather than
anything later.

However, the `origin_server_ts` of the delayed event should be the time that the event is actually sent by the homeserver.

This is a general problem that arises with the introduction
of [Cryptographic Identities](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4080).
A user can intentionally, or caused by network conditions, delay the signing and sending of an event.
A possible solution would be the introduction of a `signing_ts` (in the signed section) and keep the `origin_server_ts`
in the unsigned section.
Both are reasonable data points that clients might want to use.
This would solve issues related to delayed events since
it would make it transparent to clients, when an event was scheduled and when it was distributed over federation.

## Alternatives

### OAuth 2.0 scope for management endpoints

Instead of the [delayed event management endpoints](#managing-delayed-events) being unauthenticated
to permit [delegation to an external service](#delegating-delayed-events),
those endpoints could be given an OAuth 2.0 scope and be restricted to sessions that have requested it.
The scope would be within the existing `urn:matrix:client:api:*` scope,
so that access to the entirety the Client-Server API would include access to these endpoints as well.

Using OAuth 2.0 to restrict access on these endpoints has many benefits over using a path parameter (`delay_id`) as an access token,
such as more fine-grained revocability on access to the endpoints,
and better identification of what entity is requesting these endpoints, which can be used to apply per-entity ratelimits.

The downsides of this approach are its requirement on the homeserver supporting the OAuth 2.0 login API,
and the additional network/configuration overhead for external services to request access to this scope.

### Management endpoint action in request body

A previous version of this MSC defined the [delayed event management endpoints](#managing-delayed-events)
with a single URL for all management actions, where the action to perform was specified in the request's JSON body
in a field named "action":

```http
POST /_matrix/client/v1/delayed_events/1234567890
Content-Type: application/json

{
  "action": "send"
}
```

This has been changed to permit more fine-grained routing/load-balancing/authentication/scopes on those endpoints,
and to optimize network traffic by eliminating the payload of these requests.

### Batch sending

In some scenarios it is important to allow to send an event with an associated
delay at the same time.

- One example would be redacting an event. It only makes sense to redact the event if it exists.
  It might be important to have the guarantee that the delayed redact is received
  by the server at the time where the original message is sent.
- In the case of a state event, a user might want to set the state to `A` and after a
  timeout change it back to `{}`. By using two separate requests, sending `A` could work,
  but the event with content `{}` could fail. The state would not automatically
  reset to `{}`.

For this use case, batch sending of multiple delayed events would be desired.

Batch sending is not included in the proposal of this MSC however since batch sending should
become a generic Matrix concept as proposed with `/send_pdus`. (see: [MSC4080: Cryptographic Identities](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4080))

[MSC2716: Incrementally importing history into existing rooms](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/2716)
already proposes a `batch_send` endpoint. However, it is limited to application services and focuses on historic
data. Since the additional capability to use a template `event_id` parameter is also needed,
this probably is not a good fit.

### Reusing the `send`/`state` endpoints

Instead of creating a new endpoint for scheduling a delayed event,
the `send` and `state` endpoints could support sending events with a delay,
via an optional query parameter for specifying the desired delay:

`PUT /_matrix/client/v1/rooms/{roomId}/send/{eventType}/{txnId}?delay={delay_ms}`

`PUT /_matrix/client/v1/rooms/{roomId}/state/{eventType}/{stateKey}?delay={delay_ms}`

This would require the endpoints to give a different response body when sending a delayed event,
as the usual response of the event ID is unavailable at the time of scheduling a delayed event.

The main benefit of reusing the endpoints as described is the potential for code reuse in server implementations.
However, this could be negated by the complexity of having to support multiple response body formats.

This approach also requires using a query parameter for a purpose other than filtering,
which defies the usual semantics of a URI query.

### Allocating the event ID at the point of scheduling the send

This was considered, but when sending a delayed event the `event_id` is not yet available:

The Matrix spec says that the `event_id` must use the [reference hash](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.16/rooms/v11/#event-ids)
which is [calculated from the fields](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.16/server-server-api/#calculating-the-reference-hash-for-an-event)
of an event including the `origin_server_ts` as defined in [this list](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.16/rooms/v11/#client-considerations)

Since the `origin_server_ts` may change due to re-scheduling the event's send time, the event ID cannot be relied upon
as it would also change.

### MSC4018 (use client sync loop)

[MSC4018: Reliable call membership](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4018) also
proposes a way to make call memberships reliable. It uses the client sync loop as
an indicator to determine if the event is expired, instead of letting the SFU
inform about the call termination or using the call app ping/refresh loop as proposed earlier in this MSC.

The advantage is that this does not require introducing a new ping system
(as is proposed here by using the `delayed_events/{delay_id}/restart` action).
Though with cryptographic identities, the client needs to create the leave event.

The timeout for syncs are much slower than what would be desirable (30s vs 5s).

With a widget implementation for calls, it cannot be guaranteed that the widget is running during the sync loop.
So one either has to move the hangup logic to the hosting client or let the widget run all the time.

A dedicated ping (independent to the sync loop) is more flexible and allows for the widget to
execute the timer restart.
If the widget dies, the call membership will disconnect.

Additionally, the specification should not include specific
custom server rules if possible.
Sending an event on behalf of a user based on the client sync loop if there is an event with a specific type and specific
content is quite a server-specific behaviour, and also would not work well with encrypted state events and cryptographic
identities.
This proposal is a general behaviour valid for all event types.

### Federated delayed events

Delayed events could be sent over federation immediately and then have the receiving servers process (sent down to clients)
them at the appropriate time.

Downsides of this approach that have been considered are that:

- individual "heartbeats"/restarts would need to distributed via federation, meaning more traffic and processing
to be done.
- if any homeservers missed the federated "heartbeat"/restart message, then they might decide that the event is visible
to clients whereas
other homeservers might have received it and come to a different conclusion. If the event was later cancelled then
resolving the inconsistency feels more complex than if the event was never sent in the first place.

[MSC3277: Scheduled messages](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/3277) proposes a similar feature
and there is an extensive analysis of the pros and cons of this MSC vs MSC3277
[in this discussion](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4140#discussion_r1653083566).

If it's not needed to allow modification of a delayed event after it has been scheduled, there is a benefit in
federating the scheduled event (adding it to the DAG immediately). It increases resilience: the sender's homeserver can
disconnect and the delayed message still will enter non-soft-failed state (will be sent).

However, for the MatrixRTC use case it's required to be able to modify the event after it has been scheduled. As such,
this approach has been discounted.

### MQTT style Last Will

[MQTT](https://mqtt.org/) has the concept of a Will Message that is published by the server when a client disconnects.

The client can set a Will Message when it connects to the server. If the client disconnects unexpectedly, the server will
publish the Will Message if the client is not back online within a specified time.

A similar concept could be applied to Matrix by having the client specify a set of "Last Will" events and have the
homeserver trigger them if the client (possibly identified by device ID) does not send an API request within a specified
time.

The main differentiator is that this type of approach might use the sync loop as the "heartbeat" equivalent similar to
[MSC4018](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4018).

A benefit compared to this proposal is that theoretically there would be no additional network traffic overhead.

Some complications are:

- in order to avoid additional network traffic, the homeserver would need to proactively realise that a connection
has dropped. Depending on the network/load balancer stack this might be problematic.
- as an alternative, the client could reduce the long poll timeout (from a typical 30s down to, say, 5s) which would
result in a traffic increase.
- As syncing is a per-client concept, the MatrixRTC app has to either run in the same process as the client so that a
MatrixRTC app failure triggers the client Last Will or the client has to observe the MatrixRTC app and simulate the Last
Will if the MatrixRTC app fails.

### `M_INVALID_PARAM` instead of `M_MAX_DELAY_EXCEEDED`

The existing `M_INVALID_PARAM` error code could be used instead of introducing a new error code `M_MAX_DELAY_EXCEEDED`.

### Naming

The following alternative names for this concept are considered:

- Future
- DelayedEvents
- PostponedEvents
- LastWill

### Don't provide a `send` action

Instead of providing a `send` action for delayed events, the client could cancel the outstanding delayed event and send
a new non-delayed event instead.

This would simplify the API, but it's less efficient since the client would have to send two requests instead of one.

### Use `DELETE` HTTP method for `cancel` action

Instead of providing a `cancel` action for delayed events, the client could send a `DELETE` request to the same endpoint.

This feels more elegant, but it doesn't feel like a good suggestion for how the other actions are mapped.

### [Ab]use typing notifications

Some exploration of using typing notifications to indicate that a user is still connected to a call was done.

The idea of extending [MSC3038: Typed typing notifications](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/3038)
to allow for additional meta data (like device ID and call ID) was considered.

A perceived benefit was that if the delay events were federated, then the typing notification EDUs might provide an
efficient transport.

However, as the conclusion was to [not federate the delayed events](#federated-delayed-events), this approach was
discounted in favour of a dedicated endpoint.

### Alternative to `running_since` field

Some alternatives for the `running_since` field on the `GET` response are:

- `delaying_from`
- `delayed_since`
- `delaying_since`
- `last_restart` - but this feels less clear than `running_since` for a delayed event that hasn't been restarted
- `send_time` - with a value of `delay` + the start time of the timer

### Syncing failed delayed events

Currently, clients have to fetch the delayed event info after the timeout to find an error in case the event failed.
We could instead define a new method to push failed delayed events down `/sync` to the sender. However, this could be
complicated and it's not clear whether clients actually need immediate notifications about failed delayed events.

### Cancelling delayed state events by a more recent state event

There may be use cases that depend on delayed state events, which may be disrupted by
changes made to the same piece of state that a scheduled delayed state event would set.
To avoid this disruption, a special rule for handling delayed state events could be implemented:

> A delayed event `D` gets cancelled if:
>
> - `D` is a state event with key `k` and type `t` from sender `s`.
> - A new state event `N` with type `t` and key `k` is sent into the room.
> - The sender of `D` is different to the sender `N`.

If a new state event is sent to the same room at the same entry (`event_type`, `state_key` pair) as a delayed event by a
**different matrix user**, any delayed event for this entry (`event_type`, `state_key` pair) is cancelled.

This only happens if its a state update from a different user. If it is from the same user, the delayed event will not
get cancelled.
If the same user is updating the state which has associated delayed events, this user is in control of those delayed events.
They can just cancel and check the events manually using the `GET /delayed_events` endpoint.

In the case where the delayed event gets cancelled due to a different user updating the same state, there
is no race condition here since a possible race between timeout and the _new state event_ will always converge to
the _new state event_:

- timeout for _delayed event_ followed by _new state event_: the room state will be updated twice: once by the content of
  the delayed event but later with the content of _new state event_.
- _new state event_ followed by timeout for _delayed event_: the _new state event_ will cancel the outstanding _delayed event_.

The finalised delayed event as represented by the finalised list of the GET endpoint (See:[Getting delayed events](#getting-delayed-events))
will be stored with the following outcome:

```json
"outcome": "cancel",
"reason": "error",
"error": {
  "errcode": "M_CANCELLED_BY_STATE_UPDATE",
  "error":"The delayed event did not get sent because a different user updated the same state event.
  So the scheduled event might change it in an undesired way."
}
```

Whilst the MSC is in the proposal stage,
The `M_UNKNOWN` `errcode` should be used instead of `M_CANCELLED_BY_STATE_UPDATE` as follows:

```json
"outcome": "cancel",
"reason": "error",
"error": {
  "errcode": "M_UNKNOWN",
  "org.matrix.msc4140.errcode": "M_CANCELLED_BY_STATE_UPDATE",
  "error":"The delayed event did not get sent because a different user updated the same state event.
  So the scheduled event might change it in an undesired way."
}
```

Note that this behaviour does not apply to regular (non-state) events as there is no concept of a (`event_type`, `state_key`)
pair that could be overwritten.

This rule is proposed as alternative because there is presently no use case that relies on delayed state events.
An earlier revision of MatrixRTC used delayed state events for call membership and relied on this rule to prevent
race conditions, but it has since migrated to using [Sticky Events](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4354)
instead of state events for this, and thus no longer needs this rule.

## Security considerations

All new endpoints are authenticated.

To mitigate the risk of users flooding the delayed events database, servers MUST impose limits on the number and
timeout duration of scheduled delayed events. The exact limits are left as an implementation detail.

It is the server maintainers responsibility to evaluate the best trade-off between what use cases
their users have for delayed events for and the resources they are able to provide.

Its the homeserver implementers responsibility to communicate this and educate the server hosters about the trade-offs
and potentially give sane example values for those configurations.

As described [above](#power-levels-are-evaluated-at-the-point-of-sending), the homeserver **must** evaluate and enforce the
power levels at the time of the delayed event being sent (i.e. added to the DAG).

This has the risk that this feature could be used by a malicious actor to circumvent existing rate limiting measures which
corresponds to the [High Volume of Messages](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.16/appendices/#threat-high-volume-of-messages)
threat. The homeserver **should** apply rate-limiting to both the scheduling of delayed events and the later sending to
mitigate this risk, as well as limiting the number of scheduled events a user can have at any one time.

## Unstable prefix

Whilst the MSC is in the proposal stage, the following should be used:

- `org.matrix.msc4140.delay` should be used instead of the `delay` query parameter.
- `POST /_matrix/client/unstable/org.matrix.msc4140/delayed_events/{delay_id}` should be used instead of
  the `POST /_matrix/client/v1/delayed_events/{delay_id}` endpoint.
- `GET /_matrix/client/unstable/org.matrix.msc4140/delayed_events` should be used instead of
  the `GET /_matrix/client/v1/delayed_events` endpoint.
- The `M_UNKNOWN` `errcode` should be used instead of `M_MAX_DELAY_EXCEEDED` as follows:

```json
{
  "errcode": "M_UNKNOWN",
  "error": "The requested delay exceeds the allowed maximum.",
  "org.matrix.msc4140.errcode": "M_MAX_DELAY_EXCEEDED",
  "org.matrix.msc4140.max_delay": 86400000
}
```

instead of:

```json
{
  "errcode": "M_MAX_DELAY_EXCEEDED",
  "error": "The requested delay exceeds the allowed maximum.",
  "max_delay": 86400000
}
```

- The `M_UNKNOWN` `errcode` should be used instead of `M_MAX_DELAYED_EVENTS_EXCEEDED` as follows:

```json
{
  "errcode": "M_UNKNOWN",
  "error": "The maximum number of delayed events has been reached.",
  "org.matrix.msc4140.errcode": "M_MAX_DELAYED_EVENTS_EXCEEDED"
}
```

instead of:

```json
{
  "errcode": "M_MAX_DELAYED_EVENTS_EXCEEDED",
  "error": "The maximum number of delayed events has been reached."
}
```

Additionally, the feature is to be advertised as an unstable feature in the `GET /_matrix/client/versions` response, with
the key `org.matrix.msc4140` set to `true`. So, the response could then look as follows:

```json
{
    "versions": ["..."],
    "unstable_features": {
        "org.matrix.msc4140": true
    }
}
```

Once the MSC is accepted, but before the server advertises the spec version that includes the MSC, the server should
advertise `org.matrix.msc4140.stable` as an unstable feature flag to let clients know that they can use the stable
endpoints for sending and managing delayed events.

### Implementation differences

In the Synapse implementation of this MSC:
- `GET /_matrix/client/v1/delayed_events` does not yet support query parameters,
  and returns only scheduled delayed events,
  under a key of `"delayed_events"` instead of `"scheduled"`.
- [The management endpoints](#managing-delayed-events) use a single URL for all management actions,
  in the manner described [here](#management-endpoint-action-in-request-body).

## Dependencies

None.
