# MSC4414: Design decision - Errors

A proposal to set the direction for error design in the future.


## Process note

A typical MSC will change the actual specification itself. This MSC is a little different because it
doesn't have such a direct impact on the spec. Instead, this proposal acts as an open discussion
place and sets a given design direction for a part of Matrix. Future/existing MSCs can use the outcome
of this proposal to help shape their own technical design, allowing them to be more successful in the
process.

This proposal is also meant to be lacking any meaningful technical details. The goal is to reach a
consensus for broad direction rather than specific data structures or implementation. MSCs which build
upon this proposal's outcome will explore possible implementations.

This proposal's expected trajectory through the MSC process looks something like this:

1. The MSC is opened with no specific direction chosen.
2. The SCT and community review the MSC, shaping its direction. The intention is to avoid a simple
   vote. Instead, review should aim to add details and nuance to the proposal text.
3. The MSC is updated to head in the direction which looks to have rough consensus.
4. Further review happens as needed.                                                                   **<-- YOU ARE HERE**
5. The MSC is put forward for FCP (merge) by the SCT. This indicates preference to choose the direction
   outlined by the MSC.
6. A (hopefully) successful FCP happens. The proposal is incorporated into the spec as a preferred
   approach. For example, in the [Guiding Principles section](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.17/proposals/#guiding-principles)
   of the spec process itself. New sections may be created as needed.
7. MSCs propose changes using this MSC's defined outcome.

Comments not in threads will be ignored by the author, per normal process. Please prefer to leave comments
on the most applicable paragraph, or a heading within the proposal if supplying broader feedback.


## Background / Introduction

Over 2025 and into 2026, a few features have wanted to give more descriptive error messages to users.
Many clients in Matrix "reinterpret" errors from the server to provide something a bit more local to
the user, though in some cases can hide the detail the server is trying to convey. For example, in
a Trust & Safety (T&S) environment, the server may be trying to indicate that a message was denied
due to spam, but the client simply shows "failed to send message". In another example, a server may
be trying to provide more specific wording or detail about why the user might need to choose a paid
plan on the server, but the client is hiding that with a generic "a limit was reached" error.

For some clients, reinterpretation of errors is required specifically because servers have historically
provided not-so-great error messages, like "Invalid signature for server t2l.io with key ed25519:a_iRjt:
Unable to verify signature for t2l.io". Some instances of these have been fixed by servers over the
years, but users can still run into impossible-to-understand errors in some clients.

Ideally, clients also show errors in the user's chosen language. It can be jarring to a user when they're
reading an error in English but the rest of the app is not-English. Servers almost exclusively produce
error messages in English, though they do have access to things like the [`Accept-Language` header](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Reference/Headers/Accept-Language).
If the server generates the translation, the server might be lacking language support compared to the
client and therefore show something in a different language to the user.

Instead of the server translating errors, clients could be provided with significantly more detail
on errors. Currently, clients have access to a Matrix error code, HTTP status code, and plain text
error message generated by the server. Adding more detail, such as additional fields or finer-grained
Matrix error codes, would enable clients to construct a more informative error message. As the detail
offered by the server (and spec) increases over time, clients would need to update their error presentation
too. This could potentially mean users see the "wrong" message while their server and client updates
are desynchronized (not all users are in control of their Matrix stack: a delayed app store update
might prevent their client from supporting new detail offered by a freshly upgraded server).

It is worth noting that the [current specification](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.17/client-server-api/#standard-error-response)
does intend that server-returned error messages are "human readable". As implied above however, human
understanding can and does differ from readability. "Invalid signature" is better understood by a
server (or possibly client) developer, but is meaningless to an end user. "Failed to join room due to
a server error" would be a better representation of the problem for an end user.

Overall, this proposal intends to solve [matrix-spec#377](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec/issues/377)
by clarifying whether clients should rely on their own generation for errors or the server's generation
of errors. If (continuing to) rely on their own code, servers will need to supply more detail to clients
so they can do so. If (returning to) reliance on the server's own message, servers may have to support
translations. Servers may also be interested in being able to offer not just plaintext error messages
to create a richer experience in the client.


## Tradeoffs

Implied above, either clients or servers should be primarily responsible for *rendering* errors to
users. There are (dis)advantages to using either option.

If relying primarily on servers to render errors for users, servers will find themselves needing to
get into translations to support a wider user base, and clients will be effectively asked to take on
the product identity of the server rather than their own. Clients are generally uncomfortable with
giving up the relationship they have with their users, especially as it relates to identity. For
example, if a client typically takes a more casual "oops! it exploded haha" type of vibe when
interacting with their users, the server returning a highly professional "There was an error. Please
contact support with reference number 1234567890 if the issue persists, and try again later" is
jarring to say the least.

This mismatch of product identity can be managed in environments where there is limited choice of
client, such as in private federations or company deployments. In the typical public federation
deployment where servers are either publicly available or have no restrictions on which clients can
be used, there is plenty of opportunity for product identities to conflict with each other.

Ensuring the client software and user operating that client have a healthy, consistent, relationship
is important for the protocol's success because it removes surprises from the user experience. With
fewer surprises, platforms and software built on top of Matrix can be more successful in retaining
their users.

There is also a relationship between the homeserver and the user with an account on that homeserver.
Some of that relationship is defined by the software the homeserver chooses to use, but a large part
of it is decided by how the homeserver interacts with the user. For example, when a user creates an
account on matrix.org, they receive a DM from the homeserver with information on how to support the
project and server. This homeserver identity rarely conflicts with the relationship that clients
have with their users, though it can be a little surprising to a user if a client intended for
private servers is used on a public server.

The server software's relationship with their users is through the clients which operate the
Client-Server API. By providing significantly more detail to clients over that API, servers can
communicate what went wrong in the client's chosen identity, limiting the surprise to the presence
of an error message rather than the language used in that message.

Providing that detail to clients requires expanding the protocol's error system to cover the widest
possible variety of clients. There will be clients which present the error message unmodified from
the server to the user, but there will also be clients which want to completely rewrite the error
before showing it to the user. Both of those clients (and all the ones inbetween) will need to be
supported by the protocol.

*Editorial: Further discussion on client wants/needs is available on this very MSC
[here](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4414#discussion_r2774183263) and
[here](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4414#discussion_r2793378907).*


## Proposal

In the [Standard Error Response](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.18/client-server-api/#standard-error-response),
the `error` string retains its human-readable requirement, but is clarified to indicate that the
audience for the error message is expected to be client and server developers. The `error` string is
explicitly clarified to say that it might not be an end user-friendly error message.

A [convention for Matrix APIs](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.18/appendices/#conventions-for-matrix-apis)
is also established to clarify that `error` message strings are intended for a developer audience.
The newly established convention will further state that proposals SHOULD ensure their error responses
are detailed enough for a client to interpret it without using `error` message strings.

It is expected that future MSCs will aim to solve the general case for proposals through a system
like sub-error codes, making `errcode` an array, or similar. This proposal intends to have other
proposals consider what information is required rather than define any specific system to use.

There are no requirements placed on clients for how to handle or present errors to users. Clients
can, for example, ignore errors by sending them to `/dev/null`, show a dialog with the `error` string
copied verbatim, interpret the non-`error` fields of the error JSON to render a different message,
show a "something went wrong" error always (hiding specific details), or use a combination of approaches
to communicate to the user that an error happened.

A future MSC or initiative may explore putting *some* requirements on clients for handling and presenting
errors to users after the protocol has a chance to explore how it communicates errors.


## Potential issues

* By not specifying a specific subsystem to prefer for communicating errors, the protocol might see
  multiple different approaches to the general case of expressing that an error occurred to the client.
  Much of this expansion is expected to be handled within the normal MSC process, though some will end
  up in the released protocol. Over sufficient time, the protocol will eventually converge on a set of
  communication mechanisms which work for most cases, removing the ones which are found to be less
  effective. (*Editorial: that eventual consistency is expected to be measured in years/decades.*)

* Some proposals and features in Matrix might need to use the homeserver's identity rather than the
  client's identity to communicate a failure. For example, the [`M_USER_LIMIT_EXCEEDED`](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.18/client-server-api/#common-error-codes)
  error code might want to present specific messaging to encourage conversions to a paid service.
  In those cases, it's expected that the error JSON have enough detail where the client can either
  construct that messaging or render it verbatim (acknowledging the security risks and human language
  compatibility concerns that come with the server returning an end user-facing bit of text/markup).


## Security considerations

The threat model for Matrix is unchanged by this proposal. If a different approach where the server
was specifying HTML or similar for the client to render was used, then the security considerations
would also be different.


## Unstable prefix

This proposal is direction-setting and has no technical component. It therefore does not have an
unstable prefix. MSCs which depend on this MSC should have their own unstable prefixes.


## Dependencies

This proposal has no direct dependencies. Multiple MSCs may be waiting for a conclusion to this MSC
before attempting to make forward progress, however.
