# MSC4468: Reporting to communities

*This MSC is part of “Reporting v2” - a project led by the Foundation’s T&S team to improve communication
and effectiveness of reports on Matrix.*

**Note**: This proposal is not intended to be a complete idea. It should be heavily reviewed prior
to implementation. It may be closed or replaced by a different approach as needed.

[MSC4457](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4457) introduces a generic reporting
API which can be used to report a wide variety of content and material. Other MSCs are expected to
add routing capabilties to that API to send reports to more places than just the local server admin.
Those proposals have not yet been written (at time of writing this proposal).

This proposal does *not* define routing, but does define a mechanism that a future routing proposal
can use to forward reports to community safety teams. As of writing, it's not yet determined whether
this new mechanism should be available for direct reports (ie: skipping a call to `/report` and just
sending the report to the community safety team instead). Arguments in that area are discussed later
in this proposal.

This proposal is intended to replace a large part of [MSC3215](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/3215).
Reporting v2 as a project replaces the remainder of MSC3215.


## Proposal

Similar to MSC3215, a new state event is added to rooms which wish to receive reports:

```json5
{
  "type": "m.room.reporting",
  "state_key": "", // always an empty string
  "content": {
    "community_id": "opaque", // REQUIRED; https://spec.matrix.org/v1.18/appendices/#opaque-identifiers
    "via_user_id": "@user:example.org" // REQUIRED; MUST be a user ID with above-state_default power level in the room
  },
  // other fields not included for brevity
}
```

If any `REQUIRED` field is missing or has the wrong type (not an opaque string or not a user ID, for
example), then the room is assumed to have no reporting capability. This is also the case if the state
event is *not* set.

The `via_user_id` MUST be a user with above-`state_default` power level to signify that the user is
indeed trusted by the room/community. A simple above-default condition was considered, however a
room moderator could designate some random user as the report target without giving them similar
ability to do anything with those reports. The `via_user_id` user does *not* need to be a joined
member of the room, but clients which set the `m.room.reporting` state event SHOULD ensure there's
a plausible path for the user to join if needed. For example, the user setting `m.room.reporting` has
permission to invite other users and the user isn't banned, or the room is publicly joinable. Invites
SHOULD NOT be sent when setting `m.room.reporting` because the user ID may not be a "real" user ID:
it could be synthetic or only exist virtually on their homeserver.

The `community_id` is an identifier for the software running the `via_user_id` to coordinate reports
across vague or formal collections of rooms. For example, all rooms in a [Space](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.18/client-server-api/#spaces)
would probably have the same `community_id`. A collection of rooms outside of a Space might also use
the same `community_id` if they share a safety team.

To send a report to the `via_user_id`, the sender utilizes [Send-to-Device Messaging](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.18/client-server-api/#send-to-device-messaging). *When* a report is sent using this mechanism is not (yet?) defined by
this proposal.

The "event type" of the to-device message is `m.report`. The "event content" is as follows. It's
expected that the message be sent to *all* of the `via_user_id`'s devices rather than any specific
one.

```json5
{
  "community_id": "as above", // REQUIRED; copied verbatim from the `m.room.reporting` state event
  "report_id": "opaque", // REQUIRED; https://spec.matrix.org/v1.18/appendices/#opaque-identifiers

  // Remaining fields and their schemas are copied from MSC4457's `/report` request body. Example:
  "type": "complaint",
  "regarding": "<identifier>",
  "harm": "<MSC4456 harm identifier>",
  "description": "This is spam"
}
```

**Note**: The `sender` of a to-device message is disclosed to the receiver. This proposal largely
expects that when MSC4457's report endpoint gains routing that the caller will have the option of
deciding whether their user ID is disclosed to the destination. If the user chooses *not* to have
their user ID disclosed, the server would likely use a synthetic/system user ID instead to mask it.

The report ID is generated by the sender to link any sender-opened tickets with what they've forwarded
or sent to the community's safety team. A future proposal which enables communication between report
sender (who is possibly anonymized) and community safety team might allow the community safety team's
tooling to include another reference identifier for their system.


## Potential issues

* Instead of to-device messages, we could use a room like in MSC3215 and [MSC4226](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4226).
  This proposal uses to-device messages because of their ephemeral and queue characteristics. A room
  with an invite requires both sender and receiver to be in direct communication with each other in
  order to set it up, and requires both sender and receiver to be able to consume (possibly encrypted)
  room events. This is fine if both ends are bots, but this might not always be the case. A server
  sending a report can easily "inject" a to-device message without creating a real user account, and
  the receiver can validate the incoming message without needing to run state resolution or similar
  first. By using to-device messages, the sender can batch reports up until it can reach the destination.

  A benefit of a room-based approach is there is a natural medium for additional information to be
  attached to a report and for ongoing communication to happen. This proposal doesn't prohibit the
  use of a room for those functions, but does intend to make the action of sending a report asynchronous
  to support offline targets.

  **TODO**: Research needs to be done to measure reliability of reporting during high volume incidents.
  It's entirely possible that the "send while offline" requirement isn't actually needed.

* The report and community ID are sender-controlled values, and the async nature of the reporting
  mechanism means the receiver doesn't get an opportunity to say they're invalid or duplicated. Receivers
  SHOULD drop (ignore) reports for unknown or invalid community IDs. Receivers are encouraged to consider
  assigning their own case/report IDs to incoming reports which link to the sender-supplied value.

  A future MSC which enables communication between receiver and (anonymized) sender can also be used
  to indicate that a value may be invalid or duplicated.

  **TODO**: Do we also need to authenticate the sender with a signature or similar?

**TODO**: More issues as needed.


## Alternatives

Alternatives are discussed in the Potential Issues section.


## Security considerations

**TODO**: Expand on this. Specifically, the requirements around `via_user_id`.


## Unstable prefix

While this proposal is not considered stable, implementations should use `org.matrix.msc4468.report`
in place of `m.report` and `org.matrix.msc4468.reporting` in place of `m.room.reporting` (note lack
of `.room` in unstable prefix).


## Dependencies

This proposal relies on some schemas from the following proposals:

* [MSC4457: Generic reporting API](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4457)

This proposal obsoletes:
* [MSC3215: Moderation in all things](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/3215).

This proposal might obsolete the following proposals, but has not yet been verified as doing so:

* [MSC4226: Reports as rooms](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4226)
* [MSC2938: Reporting content to moderators](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/2938)
* [MSC4279: Server notice rooms](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4279)
* Possibly more/less
