# MSC4469: Reporting to remote servers

*This MSC is part of “Reporting v2” - a project led by the Foundation’s T&S team to improve communication
and effectiveness of reports on Matrix.*

**Note**: This proposal is not intended to be a complete idea. It should be heavily reviewed prior
to implementation. It may be closed or replaced by a different approach as needed.

**Note to reader**: This is essentially the Federation version of [MSC4468: Report to communities](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4468).

[MSC4457](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4457) introduces a generic reporting
API which can be used to report a wide variety of content and material. Other MSCs are expected to
add routing capabilities to that API to send reports to more places than just the local server admin.
Those proposals have not yet been written (at time of writing this proposal).

This proposal does *not* define routing, but does define a mechanism that a future routing proposal
can use to forward reports to other server administrators over federation. Unlike MSC4468, this new
mechanism can only be used by servers because it operates within [EDUs](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.18/server-server-api/#edus).

EDUs are chosen for primarily the same reasons why MSC4468 chooses to-device messages: they create a
natural durable queue and don't require the receiver to be online in the moment. When a future proposal
enables a client to list reports they've sent, it's expected that "queued for sending but not yet
received" reports will be surfaced as an explicit status - both for this proposal's reports and for
MSC4468's.

Alternatively, a traditional endpoint could be used. [MSC3843](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/3843)
demonstrates a variant of this approach (as of writing, it is not aware of the unification that MSC4457
brings).


## Proposal

With heavy inspiration from MSC4468's to-device message schema, a new EDU is defined:

```json5
{
  "edu_type": "m.report",
  "content": {
    "report_id": "opaque", // REQUIRED; https://spec.matrix.org/v1.18/appendices/#opaque-identifiers
    "sender": "@reporter:example.org", // OPTIONAL; If supplied, MUST be a user belonging to the `origin` server

    // Remaining fields and their schemas are copied from MSC4457's `/report` request body. Example:
    "type": "complaint",
    "regarding": "<identifier>",
    "harm": "<MSC4456 harm identifier>",
    "description": "This is spam"
  }
}
```

**Note**: EDUs don't have a concept of "origin" server on their own. The `origin` is as per the wrapping
[transaction](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.18/server-server-api/#transactions).

The `sender` is intended to be the user which filed the original report, not a service account (or
similar) belonging to the sending server's tooling/safety team. If the sender does not wish to be
disclosed to the remote server, `sender` is simply omitted.

Like in MSC4468, the report ID is generated by the sender to link any sender-opened tickets with what
they've forwarded or sent to the remote server's safety team. A future proposal which enables communication
between report sender (who is possibly anonymized) and remote server safety team might allow the
remote server safety team's tooling to include another reference identifier for their system.

As mentioned in the introduction, *when* to use this EDU is left as a detail for a future MSC. This
proposal describes *how* to send a report to a remote server.


## Potential issues

* The sending server can't know if the remote server actually received the report or not, especially
  if the remote server is outdated/old at the time of sending. The remote server will likely drop
  "unknown" EDUs without processing them, meaning reports might get lost.

  A mechanism to version check and/or identify dropped EDUs would increase confidence that the remote
  end isn't unintentionally dropping received reports. Not much can be done about intentionally
  dropping reports, at least within the Matrix specification.

* Mentioned in the introduction, a synchronous alternative via a dedicated endpoint may be preferred.
  Such an endpoint would also help ensure that the sending server knows that the receiving server
  supports the mechanism, but does require the remote server to be online.

* The report ID is a sender-controlled value, and the async nature of this reporting mechanism means
  the receiver doesn't get an opportunity to say the report ID is duplicated. Receivers are encouraged
  to consider assigning their own case/report IDs to incoming reports which link to the sender-supplied
  value.

  The `report_id` is intended to be the same that's returned by the `/report` endpoint in MSC4457, and
  therefore unique only to the sender rather than globally unique.

  A future MSC which enables communication between receiver and (anonymized) sender can also be used
  to indicate that a value may be invalid or duplicated.


## Alternatives

Alternatives are discussed in the Potential Issues section.


## Security considerations

**TODO**: Expand on this. Particularly how the sender is authenticated to the receiver during the
report.


## Unstable prefix

While this proposal is not considered stable, implementations should use `org.matrix.msc4469.report`
in place of `m.report` for the EDU.


## Dependencies

This proposal relies on some schemas from the following proposals:

* [MSC4457: Generic reporting API](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4457)

This proposal obsoletes:
* [MSC3843: Reporting content over federation (API approach)](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/3843).
